Welcome to Lobster!

This document is the starting point for all the Lobster documentation.

Lobster [home page][] on the web, [GitHub][].

## Using the compiler

Using Lobster from the [command line][], or setting up editors such as
[Sublime Text][] or [Notepad++][] as IDE.

## Learning the language

If you already know how to program in at least one C-style language
(C/C++/C\#/Java/JavaScript/PHP etc), then a way to get a quick idea of
where Lobster is different is by looking at the [C-style language Cheat
Sheet][].

Useful for reference: [all builtin functions][] (this part of the
documentation is auto-generated by the compiler).

Tutorials: How to [build a 2D shooter][] step by step in Lobster.

To learn the language more in-depth: The [language reference][]. Check
out the [style guide][] before you write lots of code :)

## Building Lobster

Read about the [implementation][] to be able to compile, extend or use
Lobster for your own C++ projects.

## Versions

Learn about what has changed recently in the [change history][].

## About Lobster

Lobster was designed and implemented by Wouter van Oortmerssen
(aardappel at gmail dot com / strlen.com).

It has been released under the Apache v2 open source licence.

Read about the [design philosophy, history and future][].

Thanks to Martin Mittring and Lee Salzman for early feedback.

  [home page]: http://strlen.com/lobster/
  [GitHub]: https://github.com/aardappel/lobster
  [command line]: command_line_usage.html
  [Sublime Text]: sublime_ide.html
  [Notepad++]: notepadpp_ide.html
  [C-style language Cheat Sheet]: C_style%20language%20Cheat%20Sheet%20for%20Lobster.html
  [all builtin functions]: builtin_functions_reference.html
  [build a 2D shooter]: shooter_tutorial.html
  [language reference]: language_reference.html
  [style guide]: style_guide.html
  [implementation]: implementation.html
  [change history]: history.txt
  [design philosophy, history and future]: philosophy.html
