---
title: Welcome to Lobster!
---

This document is the starting point for all the Lobster documentation.

Lobster [home page](http://strlen.com/lobster/) on the web,
[GitHub](https://github.com/aardappel/lobster).

Using the compiler
------------------

A quick [getting started](getting_started.html) guide.

More detailed: using Lobster from the [command line](command_line_usage.html), or setting up
editors such as [Sublime Text](sublime_ide.html), [VSCode](vscode_ide.html) or
[Notepad++](notepadpp_ide.html) as IDE.

Learning the language
---------------------

If you already know how to program in at least one C-style language
(C/C++/C\#/Java/JavaScript/PHP etc), then a way to get a quick idea of where
Lobster is different is by looking at the [C-style language Cheat
Sheet](C_style%20language%20Cheat%20Sheet%20for%20Lobster.html).

Useful for reference: [all builtin functions](builtin_functions_reference.html)
(this part of the documentation is auto-generated by the compiler).

Tutorials: How to [build a 2D shooter](shooter_tutorial.html) step by step in
Lobster.

To learn the language more in-depth: The [language
reference](language_reference.html). Check out the [style
guide](style_guide.html) before you write lots of code :) Read about the [type
system](type_checker.html) or [memory management](memory_management.html).

Building Lobster
----------------

Read about the [implementation](implementation.html) to be able to compile,
extend or use Lobster for your own C++ projects.

About Lobster
-------------

Lobster was designed and implemented by Wouter van Oortmerssen (aardappel at
gmail dot com / strlen.com).

It has been released under the Apache v2 open source licence.

Read about the [design philosophy, history and future](philosophy.html).

Thanks to Martin Mittring and Lee Salzman for early feedback.
