---
title: "Learn Lobster: Let's create a 2D shooter!"
---

Let's walk through all the steps required to make a simple game in Lobster by
making a shooter in the same vein as "Geometry Wars": enemies come at you from
all directions, and you have to keep shooting them until you invariably.. die.
Sound like fun?

You can follow along just looking at the code and screenshots below, or by
loading up `samples/shooter_tutorial/tut*.lobster` and trying them out yourself.

Decent experience in at least one other programming language required. Minor
familiarity with Lobster is required (this tutorial won't explain all the
basics, and focuses mostly on the graphics aspect). No need to know how games
work, though minor math knowledge may help.

### 1: Graphics Setup

Let's start by creating a blank canvas for us to draw on. Something like this:

![](<screenshots/shooter/tut1.jpg>)

Impressively.. empty.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
import vec
import color

fatal(gl_window("Shooter Tutorial", 640, 480))

while gl_frame() and gl_button("escape") != 1:
    gl_clear(color_black)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`gl_window` is our graphics initialization routine, and is the first thing we
need to do before we can access any other graphics functionality. We specify a
title and a size, though note that these are merely suggestions: on desktop
platforms the user may resize/maximize our window, and on mobile platforms they
just determine landscape vs portrait orientation, whereas the resolution is
determined by the device itself.

`gl_window` returns an error string if something goes wrong (and things can go
wrong, behind the scenes this call boots up an OpenGL engine including compiling
shaders and what not), and `fatal` is a utility function defined in
`std.lobster` that we're including that will quit the program and show the error
string if available.

Once we're up and running, this while loop is our *frame loop*. Games work by
rendering the current state of the game repeatedly to the screen, preferrably
fast (30-60 times per second), giving the impression of smooth animation.
`gl_frame` is the core of all of this: it makes sure we advance to rendering the
next frame, and checks for input etc. If the user clicks the close button or
otherwise terminates the app, `gl_frame` will return `false`, which is our
signal to quit the game. Additionally, we want the user to be able to quit if
they press the escape key, so we check for that too.

Then inside the frame loop, we clear the screen (remember that we draw
repeatedly), and then we're ready to draw. `color_black` is a constant
from `color.lobster`, representing a 4 component RGBA.

### 2: Drawing and World Space

So now we can start drawing, right? Well, we also have to determine where and
how we want to draw:

![](<screenshots/shooter/tut2.jpg>)

Look at that! This is starting to look impressive! Check out those polygons!

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
import std
import vec
import color

fatal(gl_window("Shooter Tutorial", 640, 480))

let worldsize = 20.0

while gl_frame() and gl_button("escape") != 1:
    gl_clear(color_black)
    gl_color(color_white)
    gl_translate(float(gl_window_size()) / 2.0)
    gl_scale(gl_window_size().y / worldsize)
    gl_circle(1, 6)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before we can actually draw, we have to talk about coordinate systems. By
default, coordinates in Lobster correspond directly to pixels, with (0,0) in the
upper left corner (a left-handed coordinate system), and the total number of
pixels depending on the device (or the user), which during any frame is given by
`gl_window_size`. While working directly with pixel sizes may be useful for some
applications, generally, we want games to be scalable, meaning they should
roughly look the same irrespective of what device they run on.

There is no universal way to do this for games however, because besides
different resolutions, you have the more problematic issue of different aspect
ratios, varying from 4:3 on the iPad (relatively square) to 3:2, 16:10 and 16:9
(longitudinal) on most desktops and other mobile devices. Your game should
ideally look good on that whole range. If you only aim for one ratio, you'll get
borders or things cut off on the other ratios. What works best depends on your
game content.

Here we'll take a simple approach: make the middle of the screen our coordinate
system origin, and rendering outward enough from there that we have all ratios
covered.

gl\_translate changes our coordinate system, and is used throughout graphics
rendering in Lobster to render things at different portions of the screen. Here
we move from upper-left to the middle of the screen by translating by half the
`gl_window_size`.

Then we have to determine how much of the game world we want to show. We don't
want that related to pixels either, as we don't want people with smaller screens
see less of the game. The computer doesn't care about real world sizes like feet
or meters, so we can make up whatever number we want. It is useful however to
pick a number, since that means if we later want to show more or less of the
gameworld, we just have to change one number. Here we say we want the screen to
be able to fit at least 20 units, and we make this relative to the y resolution
of the screen (we're assuming that'll be the smaller one of the two).

Now we can finally draw! Let's put down a temporary graphic for the player.
`gl_circle` draws circles around the current origin, with the first argument
being the radius (see how we're using the world scale for this?), and the second
argument is the number of sides. Setting this to something low like 6 actually
gets us a hexagon rather than a circle.

Pfew, that's a lot of talk just for a circle, but we're getting somewhere. Next
up, let's move our player around. Because games are supposed to be...
*interactive*

### 3: Input, Movement, and Collision

![](<screenshots/shooter/tut3.jpg>)

It moved! I swear!

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
import std
import vec
import color

fatal(gl_window("Shooter Tutorial", 640, 480))

let worldsize = 20.0
var playerpos = xy_0
let playerspeed = 10

while gl_frame() and gl_button("escape") != 1:
    gl_clear(color_black)
    gl_color(color_white)

    gl_translate(float(gl_window_size()) / 2.0)
    let scale = gl_window_size().y / worldsize
    gl_scale(scale)

    let dir = xy_f { (gl_button("d") >= 1) - (gl_button("a") >= 1),
                     (gl_button("s") >= 1) - (gl_button("w") >= 1) }
    let newpos = playerpos + normalize(dir) * gl_delta_time() * playerspeed
    if not any(abs(newpos) > float(gl_window_size()) / scale / 2):
        playerpos = newpos

    gl_translate(playerpos):
        gl_circle(1, 6)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To make our player move, we added 2 new variables: `playerpos` and
`playerspeed`. We initialize the former with a vector constant from
`vec.lobster`: `xy_0` means all zeroes.

We first figure out which direction the player wants to move by checking the
current state of the WASD keys: by combining the boolean values (0 / 1) for each
direction, both DA and SW give us a -1 / 0 / 1 value which conveniently
corresponds to a directional vector (`dir`).

Now, we can't just add this vector to the player and be done with it, we have to
take into account:

-   If the player tries to move in both x and y directions at once, the
    magnitude of the `dir` vector is sqrt(2) instead of 1, and thus the player
    would move faster! We want him to move in all directions at equal speed.
    `normalize` ensure we have a vector of length 1. You wouldn't believe how
    many games have this bug in it!

-   Remember how the code inside the while loop is our frame? Well, depending on
    the device, we have no idea how many frames per second we're actually
    running at. If we simply move a fixed amount each frame, we'll end up moving
    faster on faster computers! Yet another common bug that we'll avoid by
    multiplying our vector by `gl_delta_time`, which is the number of seconds
    (usually a fraction of a second, e.g. 0.033 at 30 FPS) that has passed since
    the last frame we rendered. The result is that we'll now move 1 unit (the
    length of the vector) per second exactly, regardless of how fast or slow our
    machine is rendering.

-   Of course, "1 unit per second" may well be too slow for our intended game,
    so we factor in our own player speed. We can tweak it later.

-   Last, but not least, once the player can move, we have to worry about him
    staying within the game world. What we have to do, is a very simple form of
    *collision detection*. Collision detection can be very difficult to program,
    but here we start by just checking the boundaries of the screen. Note that I
    put our new position in a separate variable, this is such that we will only
    make it the new player position if we're still inside the world. I also
    created a variable for the scale we set, so that we can use it to know where
    the screen boundaries are. We first take the absolute value of our new
    position (so we only have to check one quadrant of the world). Notice how
    pretty much everything in Lobster works on vectors? This makes it easy to
    write game code without repeating your code for x and y all over the place.
    We compute the size of a quadrant, and compare. `<` here gives us a vector
    of booleans, to check if any coordinates (x or y) were out of bounds, we use
    `any`. If this succeeds, we only then actually move the player. pfew!

Now we have computed a new position, we have to make sure it has an effect. We
do this by translating our player position from the middle to where we want to
now draw our hexagon. Note something special about this `gl_translate`: it has a
block of code following it (notice the `:`) much like `if` or `for`.
`gl_translate` here actually works like a control structure: it first
translates, then executes the body, then resets the translation. This is because
what we want to render afterwards (enemies perhaps) should not be rendered
relative to the player, but relative to what we had before the player (the world
origin). If that sounds confusing, it may become clearer later with more code.
Stacking all these transformations is one of the more confusing things about
games programming, but it is also rather powerful once you get the hang of it.

### 4: Orientation and Shooting

![](<screenshots/shooter/tut4.jpg>)

What happens as I move the mouse cursor in a clockwise arc around the player
from 12 to 3.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
import std
import vec
import color

fatal(gl_window("Shooter Tutorial", 640, 480))

let worldsize = 20.0

var playerpos = xy_0
let playerspeed = 10

class bullet:
    pos:xy_f
    dir:xy_f

let firerate = 0.1
let bulletspeed = 15
var bullets = []
var lastbullet = gl_time()

while gl_frame() and gl_button("escape") != 1:
    gl_clear(color_black)
    gl_color(color_white)

    gl_translate(float(gl_window_size()) / 2.0)
    let scale = gl_window_size().y / worldsize
    gl_scale(scale)

    let dir = xy_f { (gl_button("d") >= 1) - (gl_button("a") >= 1),
                     (gl_button("s") >= 1) - (gl_button("w") >= 1) }
    let newpos = playerpos + normalize(dir) * gl_delta_time() * playerspeed
    if not any(abs(newpos) > float(gl_window_size()) / scale / 2):
        playerpos = newpos

    let tomouse = normalize(gl_local_mouse_pos(0) - playerpos)

    if lastbullet < gl_time():
        bullets.push(bullet { playerpos, tomouse })
        lastbullet += firerate

    for(bullets) b:
        b.pos += b.dir * gl_delta_time() * bulletspeed
        gl_translate b.pos:
            gl_color color_yellow:
                gl_circle(0.2, 20)

    bullets = filter(bullets) b:
        magnitude(b.pos) < worldsize * 2

    gl_translate gl_local_mouse_pos(0):
        gl_line_mode 1:
            gl_color color_grey:
                gl_circle(0.5, 20)

    gl_translate playerpos:
        gl_rotate_z tomouse:
            gl_polygon([ xy { -0.5, 0.5 }, xy_x, xy { -0.5, -0.5 } ])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To be able to shoot, first we have to worry about giving our player an
orientation. We compute that in the vector `tomouse` which we get by
subtracting the player position from the mouse position (what we want to shoot
towards). Something funny is going on here though, as the name
`gl_local_mouse_pos` may indicate: normally mouse positions are in pixels, but
those we can't compare against the player position, which is in world
coordinates! `gl_local_mouse_pos` however gives us the mouse position relative to
the current transform, which is world coordinates (as specified by the
`gl_translate` and `gl_scale` above). We then normalize this vector to make it
easier to use, as we don't care about the original length of this vector.

To make the players orientation visual, we first render the player differently:
rather than a simple circle, we render him as a pointy triangle, to make it
clear what direction he's looking at. That's the `gl_polygon` at the end with 3
explicit coordinates (relative to the playerpos, which has now become our
coordinate system origin thanks to `gl_translate`). Additionally, we insert a
`gl_rotate_z` command to make the pointy part of the triangle always look
towards the mouse cursor. The `z` is because if we rotate around the z axis, we
end up rotating the xy plane, which is what we look at in 2D. The argument to
`gl_rotate_z` can either be a vector (as used here) or an angle in degrees.
Vectors are generally awesomer.

Additionally, to cater for situations where the mouse cursor isn't visible
(which it typically isn't in games) we draw a circle (for now) at the mouse
location to give the player feedback where he's aiming at. This starts at the
`gl_translate` before where we draw the player (before, because if the two
overlap, the last one will be drawn on top). We translate to the mouse location
in world space, change the linemode to 1 (which draws just the outline instead
of a filled circle) and change the color. As you can see, all these commands are
ones that undo themselves automatically after the circle is drawn, which is very
convenient.

Now let's start firing bullets. To keep things simple for now, we fire them
automatically, but firing them using a button would be very easy to add (try
it!). We add some constants up top, a firerate (second to fire the next bullet)
and their speed of travel in the world. To keep track of what's going on, we
just need a list of bullets, and track when the last bullet was fired.

We define what a bullet is by defining a new class type, saying that it just
has a current position and direction.

Now look at the `if` inside the code: we check if time has progressed beyond the
point the last bullet was supposed to be fired, and if so, we add a new bullet
to the list of bullets, making it start at the current player position,
travelling in the direction of the mouse. We also increase the `lastbullet`
variable to cause the next one to be fired in 0.1 seconds.

A sidenote on how we're implementing bullets here: there's a couple of things
not ideal about this, which we do all to keep the example simple and to really
build a game from the ground up. First, the way the checking for time is
implemented here is a bit fragile, as big time fluctuations may cause bullets to
be shot at irregular intervals. Second, this checking for time across frames is
better done with *coroutines*, but that would complicate this tutorial.

Now that we have a list of bullets being generated, we have to update them and
draw them. The first line in our `for` loop updates them, in a manner that
should look familiar by now: we move the position along the direction, scaled by
the amount of time that has passed this frame and their general speed in world
units per second.

Now they're moving, we can draw them at their current position. We make them
yellow, and 0.2 units in radius.

One last thing to before we're done: our list of bullets will grow indefinitely,
and eventually make the game run to a crawl, even though most have moved off
screen. We'll cull bullets that have moved far enough away from the origin that
they're not visible anymore. We'll do this functional style: `filter` will give
us a new list of bullets for which the magnitude of the position (which is the
same as a vector from the origin, which is the middle of the screen) is within
twice the world size. We could cull them more precisely than this, but for now,
this will have the desired effect of keeping the list small.

Wow, there's a lot to understand to make even a simple game. But the good news
is that in many games you will see the patterns of what we're doing here again
and again, so it is rather useful to get familiar with. It even translates to
3D.

But for now... target practice!

### 5: Enemies

![](<screenshots/shooter/tut5.jpg>)

Since the code is getting long, let's continue, talking purely in terms of
modifications to the existing code:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
def renderpointytriangle(pos, dir):
    gl_translate pos:
        gl_rotate_z dir:
            gl_polygon([ xy { -0.5, 0.5 }, xy_x, xy { -0.5, -0.5 } ])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, let's take the code for rendering the player and put it in it's own
function, since we'll be needing it for enemies too. Call instead of the
original code with `renderpointytriangle(playerpos, tomouse)`

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
class enemy:
    pos:xy_f
    hp:int

var enemyrate = 1.0
let enemyspeed = 3
let enemymaxhp = 5
var enemies = []
var lastenemy = gl_time()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can set up enemies analogous to bullets. Of course, we could share some of
this functionality between them, but let's not complicate matters for now. Add
this to the declarations.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    if lastenemy < gl_time():
        enemies.push(enemy { sincos(rnd(360)) * worldsize * 2, enemymaxhp })
        lastenemy += enemyrate
        enemyrate *= 0.999

    for(enemies) e:
        let playerdir = normalize(playerpos - e.pos)
        e.pos += playerdir * gl_delta_time() * enemyspeed
        for(bullets) b:
            if magnitude(b.pos - e.pos) < 1:
                e.hp = max(e.hp - 1, 0)
                b.pos = xy_x * worldsize * 10
        gl_color lerp(color_red, color_blue, div(e.hp, enemymaxhp)):
            renderpointytriangle(e.pos, playerdir)

    enemies = filter enemies: _.hp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During the frame, we use the above code to deal with enemies, which is very
similar to bullets yet again. We spawn new enemies initially once per second. To
compute a spawn location, take a random angle, convert to a vector, then offset
that vector to somewhere outside the screen to have them flock in from all
directions.

We do one special thing: we keep reducing the enemy rate subtly. This guarantees
the game will get harder and harder and the player will guaranteed die
eventually, it is just a matter of when.

Then we loop through all enemies, compute a vector towards the player, and move
the enemy towards him. Of course, now we need to do collision detection between
bullets and enemies, which we do in brute force manner by checking every bullet
with every enemy. If the quantity of both stays low, this is ok, but for large
amounts of objects this approach will eventually get too slow, requiring
bucketing of objects in a grid. For now, this is ok. We check the distance
between the center of the bullet and the center of the enemy, and consider it a
hit if they are a generous 1 unit apart or less. Of course, we could check exact
collision with the triangle, but besides being complicated, it might not even be
desirable for gameplay.

If we have a hit, we reduce the HP of the enemy by one (we're using `max` to
ensure it doesn't go below 0, you'll see why in a bit). We also need to "kill"
the bullet when that happens, but since we already have code that removes
bullets that leave the world, we are lazy and make use of that, by moving the
bullet far from the center.

Then we render the enemy conveniently with our existing function. We do
something fun here, letting the health of the enemy determine its color, from
healthy blue to a dead red. We use `lerp` (linearly interpolate) of 2 colors.
`div` is a useful function that does the same as `/` on 2 integers but gives a
float result.

Then of course we need to cull dead enemies, which we do with a similar `filter`
function. Culling all at once like we do here with bullets and enemies is nice,
because culling during update can introduce subtle bugs.

We can't really play yet however, since we can't die...

### 6: Score, and Game Over

![](<screenshots/shooter/tut6.jpg>)

Now we have some loose ends to wrap up to call this thing a "game": we have to
keep track of the player health and score (and highscore), and give him a start
/ game over screen in-between sessions.

To do that, we will have to be able to render text. First step towards doing
that is loading up a font, right after `gl_window`:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
check(gl_set_font_name("data/fonts/US101/US101.ttf") and gl_set_font_size(32), "can\'t load font!")
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`check` is another useful function much like fatal, that ensures the first
argument is true, and if not, exits the program with the given message.

To implement the functionality, we start with some new variables:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
var playerhealth = 0.0
var score = 0
var highscore = 0
var playing = false
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

inside our frame, we then test our `playing` variable, and when true, run the
game code we were running before, and if false, display the in-between screen,
which simply says:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
        var msg = "press space to play!"
        gl_translate float(gl_window_size() - gl_text_size(msg)) / 2:
            gl_text(msg)
        if gl_button("space") == 1:
            score = 0
            playerhealth = 100.0
            playerpos = xy_0
            bullets = []
            lastbullet = gl_time()
            enemyrate = 1.0
            enemies = []
            lastenemy = gl_time()
            playing = true
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `gl_translate` centers our text using the handy `gl_text_size` which tell us
the size of a string in pixels before we've even rendered it. `gl_text` then
draws it. We then reset the game state when the game starts, and next frame the
game will be playing.

To show the current state to the player, we use the simple:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    gl_text("health: " + ceiling(playerhealth) + " - score: " + score + " - highscore: " + highscore)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We call this as the very last thing in the frame, so it is visible regardless of
wether the player is in-game or not, for simplicity. `ceiling` is useful since
we'll be calculating the player's health in float, but want to show only the
whole numbers. `ceiling` here is better than `truncate`, since we only want to
show `0` when the player is truely dead.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                if magnitude(playervec) < 1:
                    playerhealth -= gl_delta_time() * 50
                    if playerhealth <= 0:
                        playerhealth = 0
                        highscore = max(highscore, score)
                        playing = false
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Then finally, inside our `for(enemies) e:` loop, we add this bit of code which
checks if this particular enemy is "touching" the player. If so, we substract
health for how long he is touching. If the player runs out of health, we update
the high score, and revert back into non-playing mode.

Game Over, and Tutorial Over!

### 7: What's next?

We now have a very basic structure of a game. While it is not impressive, it
does deal with all the typical things a game does, and thus extending it from
here should be fun and easy. Some ideas of things you could add:

-   Tweak all the current variables: player and enemy speed, enemy health and
    spawn rates, etc. The current ones are workable defaults, but are they the
    most fun?

-   A variety of enemy types. You can make them differ by speed, size and
    hitpoints easily, though giving them different behaviors will give even more
    variety.

-   Pickups for the player. Think of randomly spawning health boxes, and
    powerups (faster fire, spread fire etc).

-   Better graphics! It is a very good idea to make a game fun first with
    geometric shapes like we have done, but then once the game has taken shape,
    adding graphics can make the game feel more immersive and give better
    feedback to the player.

-   Better UI and main menu.

-   Game structure: different levels the player can try to beat, permanent
    upgrades the player can buy, etc.

### 8: Advanced Topics: Coroutines

If you look at the finished code of tut6.lobster, you can notice one problem
with game programming: we ended up with a lot of global variables, even for such
an absolutely simple game. If a game gets more complicated, this growing set of
globals will make our game hard to maintain, and error prone. Just look at the
code above that follows `if gl_button("space") == 1:` in the menu code: we need to
carefully reset each global that matters for the game, and if we forget one, we
have a bug. Generally, the less local variable access is, the harder code is to
follow.

So how do we get rid of all these globals? We could stick all these variables in
objects. And while that potentially improves some things (we can now initialize
all state related to one level in a single object, guaranteeing simulatuous
initialization), in the end we've replaced our globals with a single global that
holds... more globals. Just because we hide things in an object doesn't make
them less global, if there's only one copy of the variable and it is used
everywhere then it is effectively global. The code hasn't really improved.

Another trick to get rid of globals is to pass things as arguments instead. But
looking at the code, there are no opportunities for doing so, since we'd there's
no easy way to pass all these values from one frame to the next, unless we stick
them all in one object like before.

And this is really hinting at a deeper problem with games and global state: we
have so much global state because *we need to remember what we were doing from
one frame to the next*. Essentially, our programming language gives us great
tools to sequence actions (control structures) within a frame, but not across
frames. For example, a `for` loop is very convenient, because it allows us to
specify "do this 10 times", and we don't have to worry about keeping track of
where we are, and all data related to the loop is *local*. Now you might want to
say "do this for the next 10 frames", and you'll have no help from the language,
you need to keep track of where you are in your iteration manually, and worse,
the state related to the loop needs to survive the frame loop, which means it
has to be... *global*.

The problem is that a programming language only has one current execution
location, and one stack (where local variables reside for all active function
calls). So there's no way to interrupt a `for` loop and say, "let's come back to
this loop later", because your only options are to finish the entire loop right
now (which is useless if you want to do it over the next frames) or kill the
loop (which also kills the state associated with it).

Coroutines are the feature to fix this. Sadly, for as awesome as they are, they
are also very confusing to fully understand (if this section hasn't confused you
already!).

Put simply, a coroutine is a normal function call that can be interrupted,
frozen in time, and the later continued where you left of. It's a bit like a
thread, except instead of running code concurrently, it is more like swapping
them out. And you determine manually when you want to be interrupted. This has
the advantage of being much faster and more predictable than threads. A
coroutine determines where it wants to be interrupted by calling its last
function argument.

Since you now should fully understand the code of `tut6.lobster`, load up
`tut_coro.lobster` next to it. It is exactly the same code, with the same game
functionality, except it now it is written using coroutines. Notice how there's
only a single global variable left, one that holds either a coroutine that runs
the menu, or one that runs the game. As you can see, all coroutines have their
internal state as local variables which means when they get interrupted, it
remembers exactly where it was, regardless of how complex the control structures
you may be inside of. Sadly, in this example, we're not using that functionality
much (because I tried to keep the original game as simple as possible, and
exactly to try and reduce the state for the tutorial!), but when complexity
grows, the value of having everything locally will grow.

Imagine, for example, how you'd program a game object to wander around randomly,
then check if it sees the player, and if it does, chase it for 10 seconds, then
return to wandering, and otherwise, stand still for a bit. With coroutines, this
can programmed using just a couple of (nested) if-then's and for loops, with
everything local to the function. Without, you'd have to write a state machine,
tracking all possible behaviors the object can have, and for each behavior, all
the variables that indicate it's current state within that behavior.
Additionally, with coroutines such behaviors are easy to abstract into helper
functions, since sequencing actions is fairly compositional, whereas with a
state machine, the structure of the state machine is possibly different for
every game object thus needs to be set up anew.
